1. Articles 1 describes India that is Bharat as a union of states rather than a federation of states 
2. First schedule of Constitution lists the names of states and their territories
3. phrase 'Union of States' has been preferred to 'Federation of States' for two reasons: one- The Indian Federation is not the result of an agreement among the states like the American Federation; and 2- the states have no right to secede from the federation
4. According to Article 1 the territory of India can be classified into 3 categories: a. Territories of the states, b. Union territories, c. Territories that may be acquired by the Government of India at any time
5. Article-1: Describes India that is Bharat as a union of states rather than the Federation of states, This provision deals with 2 things- names of the country and type of polity
6. Article-2: Grants 2 powers to the parliament,  (a) the power to admit into the Union of India new states, (b) the power to establish new states, The first refers to the admission of states which are already in existence while the second refers to the establishment of states which were not in existence before
7. Article-3: Parliament to: (a) form a new state by separation of territory from any state or by uniting two or more states or parts of states or by uniting any territory to a part of any state, b. increase the area of any state, c. diminish the area of any state, d. alter the boundaries of any state, e. alter the name of any state, above changes can be introduced in the Parliament only with the prior recommendation of the President. President has to refer the same to the state legislature concerned for expressing its views within a specified period; power of Parliament to form new states includes the power to form a new state or union territory by uniting a part of any state or union territory to any other state or union territory, President (or Parliament) is not bound by the views of the state legislature, Constitution authorizes the Parliament to form new states or alter the areas; boundaries or names of the existing states without their consent, India is rightly described as 'an indestructible union of destructible states'
8. Article-4: Declares that the laws made for admission or establishment of new states and formation of new states and alteration of areas; boundaries or names of existing states are not to be considered as amendments of the constitution under article 368, such laws can be passed by a simple majority and by the ordinary legislative process
9. various commissions in evolution of states and UT’s: Dhar commission, JVP committee, Fazl Ali Commision
10. Dhar commission: For reorganization of states on linguistic basis; Accordingly in June 1948 the GOI appointed the linguistic provinces commission under a chairmanship of SK dhar to examine the feasibility,  Commision submitted its report in December 1948 and recommended the reorganisation of states on the basis of administrative convenience rather than linguistic factor
11. JVP committee: consisted of Jawaharlal Nehru; Vallahbhai Patel and Pattabhi Sitaramayya and hence was popularity known as JVP, constituted in dec 1948; submitted its report in April 1949 and formally rejected language as the basis for reorganisation of states, however in oct 1953 the GoI was forced to create the 1st linguistic states knows as Andhra state by separating the Telugu speaking areas from the Madras state because of the hunger strike and demise of Potti S.
12. Fazl Ali Commission: Dec 1953 a 3 member States Reorganization Commission under the chairmanship of Fazl Ali,  Its other 2 members were K.M. Panikkar and H.N. Kunzru, submitted its report in September 1955 and broadly accepted language as the basis of reorganization of states, It rejected the theory of 'one language-one state', commission suggested the abolition of the four-fold classification of states and territories