1. Earlier soil was classified into 2 types: Urvara(fertile), Usara(infertile).
2. On the basis of Genesis, color, composition, locality and Indian council of Agricultural Research(ICAR)- the soil of India can be classified into: Laterite soil, saline soil, forest soil, black soil, yellow and green soil, Alluvial soil, Peaty soil, Arid soil

3. Alluvial soil: mosty available soil in India(43%), Transported and deposited by rivers, found in northern plains- Indus Ganga & Brahmaputra region and also in peninsular India(Narmada; Tapti; Krishna; Godavari), Highly fertile(rich in organic) but low in nitrogen and humus, color = ranges from light grey to Ash grey, rich in potassium poor in phosphorus, khadar- new alluvial; Bhangar- old alluvial, cultivations- wheat; rice; maze; sugarcane; pulses; oilseed(humus- small micro-organisms)

4. Black soil: Regur- Coton growing, Formed due to the solidification of lava during the volcanic activity in Deccan plateau 1000 years ago, Black due to the presence of Iron and Aluminum content, Found in Maharashtra; western MP; Gujrat; Andra pradesh; Karnataka; Rajasthan; Tamil Nadu; UP, color- deep black to light black, rich in Iron; lime; calcium; potash; Aluminum; magnesium carbonate and low in Nitrogen; phosphorus and organic matter, cultivation- cotton; citrus fruit; wheat; jawar; millets; oilseeds; castor; tabbaco; sugercane; sunflower; etc

5. Desert soil: Sandy Texture- they have poor clay and moisture content but high salt-content, deposited mainly by wind activities, generally found in arid-semi arid regions like- Rajasthan; some districts of Punjab & Haryana; western part of Aravalli range, Their texture is sandy and loam, color- ranges from red to brown, due to high salt content- common salt is obtained from this soil by the process of evaporation

6. Forest and mountain soil: found in both high elevation as well as at low elevation where rainfall is sufficient, Rich in humus, low in potash; phosphorus & lime Hence infertile for the production of the field crops, suitable for plantation of tea; coffee; spices; supplying forest product such as timber and fuel, found in Himalayan region of Jammu & Kashmir; Himachal Pradesh; Uttarakhand; Karnataka; Tamil Nadu and Kerala

7. Red soil: Formed due to the decomposition of rocks like granite and gneisses, Rich in Iron; mg & potash, low in phosphorus and organic material, they are porous and spongy, found in low rainfall areas such as Tamil Nadu; Karntaka; southern Maharashtra; Chattisgarh; Telengana; Andrapradesh; Odisha; and Chotonagpur plateua of Jharkhand; west Bengal; Mirzapur; Part of Rajasthan and North east, cultivation- cotton; rice; wheat; pulses; tabacco; jowar; oilseed; millet; potatoes and fruit

8. Laterite soil: later-> Brick which becomes soft when wet and hard when dried, found in areas with high temperature and heavy rainfall- transforms the black soil into laterite, found in eastern ghats of Odisha; south of wester ghats; Maharashtra; some parts of Andra Pradesh; Tamil Nadu; Karnataka; Meghalaya; Western parts of West Bengal, rich in Iron and Aluminium; poor in Nitrogen; phosphorus; potash & Urea, appears red because of high iron-oxide content, not suitable for agriculture but for building materials

9. peaty or Marshy soil: appears in areas with heavy rainfall and high humidity, soils are black; heavy and highly acidic; highly saline, rich in organic matter but deficient in phosphate and potash, growth of vegetation is very less because of the presence of Fe and Aluminum sulphate, mainly found in western parts of Kerala, coastal parts of Odisha and Sunderban, Soil is good for paddy cultivation(rice).

10. Saline soil: infertile, deposited in dry climatic conditions, in north west- it is known as Reh and kallar

11. Classification of soil on the basis of zone: zonal soil- influence of climate as the major soil-forming factor, Intrazonal soil- some local factors is dominant(parent rock), Azonal soil- immature or poorly developed

